---
layout: post
title: Reading in 2025 - a review
tags: [reading]
toc: true
---

{% include quote.html
  content='"Well, we won\'t quarrel about a word," said the other, pleasantly.
  "Why on earth not?" said MacIan, with a sudden asperity. "Why shouldn\'t we quarrel about a word? What is the good of words if they aren\'t important enough to quarrel over? Why do we choose one word more than another if there isn\'t any difference between them? If you called a woman a chimpanzee instead of an angel, wouldn\'t there be a quarrel about a word? If you\'re not going to argue about words, what are you going to argue about?'
  title='The Ball and the Cross'
  author='G.K. Chesterton'
%}

## Overview
In 2025 I read 38 books. That's on the lower end for me in terms of volume, but still good; a total below about 30 for the year and I'm starting to worry. Every year I aim to read about a book a week—normally (almost every year) I fall short, but the goal helps me keep to keep picking up books when I get into a lull without being too dogmatic about it. If it's been a few weeks without getting through a single book I know it's time to re-prioritise.

The full list of this year's books (and past years' books, too) is available at the [Books](/books) link at the top of the sidebar. This post is just a summary of the books, themes, patterns, key quotes, etc., from the past year only and some guiding notes for next year. 

I started adding short blurbs this year, a paragraph's worth of review per book. The original reason for list of books is to record what I've actually read for my own memory (as I'm putting this post together I'm having to refer to my list constantly because there's no way I'd be able to rattle off all 38 books from this year), and often I look back on entries in the lists and find a total blank in terms of my actual reading experience. So, writing short reviews of each book is a habit aimed mostly at augmenting my memory and capturing a bit of what I was thinking at the time. It hasn't totally stuck yet, but I already appreciate reading the ones I have written. I'm trying to fill in the gaps as I go (adding in reviews retroactively).

{% include quote.html
  content='The great strength of these memoirs is that they represent an effort by working people to write their own history. All historians must use data selectively, but here, in the first instance, within some limits, the working classes decided what to include. Tellingly, they wrote at length about their reading, as if they were pointing the way for future historians.'
  author='Jonathan Rose'
  title='The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes'
  link='/books/the-intellectual-life-of-the-british-working-classes'
%}

In the distant, remote future the goal would be to have a system of reviews and quotations as effective as Mandy Brown's [*A Working Library*](https://aworkinglibrary.com/), but I'm a long way off yet.

Like every year, I also started but didn't finish a bunch of books: *Quicksilver* by Neal Stephenson (now re-kindled and will probably be the first book of 2026), *One Hundred Years of Solitude* (came back from holiday and got distracted), and *No Sense of Place* by Joshua Meyerowitz (too much work on at the time). I'll probably come back to all of these at some point. 

For the rest—the ones I did finish—I'll split it up into fiction and non-fiction, starting with the former. Also, unless otherwise stated, all of the books mentioned are either recommended or highly recommended.

## Fiction
I can't believe I'd never read any Neal Stephenson books before. [*Anathem*](/books#Anathem) immediately vaulted into my pantheon of top books, and basically shut out the top spot for best book of the year in February. Exercising *some* restraint by not immediately binging the whole of the catalogue, I also finished [*The Diamond Age*](/books#The_Diamond_Age) and started [*Quicksilver*](/books#Quicksilver), both of which I enjoyed, just not to the same extent.

{% include quote.html
  content='Well, bad crap would be an unformatted document consisting of random letters. Good crap would be a beautifully typeset, well-written document that contained a hundred correct, verifiable sentences and one that was subtly false. It’s a lot harder to generate good crap. At first they had to hire humans to churn it out. They mostly did it by taking legitimate documents and inserting errors—swapping one name for another, say.'
  author='Neal Stephenson'
  title='Anathem'
  link='/books#Anathem'
%}

I'd also consider both Stephenson books I read this year to be "science fantasy", a genre—one I'm learning is maybe my favourite—that could also include [*Matter*](/books#Matter) and [*A Fire Upon the Deep*](/books#A_Fire_Upon_the_Deep) and [*Neverness*](/books#Neverness) (and, honestly, the *Void Trilogy* by Peter F. Hamilton). And there's probably a better term than "science fantasy" for a book with a pure fantasy setting within a sci-fi context. Fantasy sci-fi? Planetary romance? [Clarke's third law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clarke%27s_three_laws) fiction? I'm thinking about it.

This year also included my slow ascent towards more South American literature, starting with novellas by Adolfo Bioy Casares ([*The Invention of Morel*](/books#The_Invention_of_Morel); perfect) and Bolaño ([*Distant Star*](/books#Distant_Star); haunting). I feel like I'm working my way from Borges' short stories, via these novellas, towards more of the heavyweight stuff. *2666* looms, next year.

{% include quote.html 
 content="The way to fight evil, he said, was to learn how to read, and by this he meant not only words but numbers, colours, signs, arrangements of tiny objects, late-night and early-morning television shows, obscure films."
 author="Roberto Bolaño"
 title="Distant Star"
 link="/books#Distant_Star"
%}

## Non-Fiction
Only 14 non-fiction books this year, although I think that's actually a higher proportion than normal, which is closer to 3:1 fiction to non-fiction. I was surprised by how much I enjoyed [*The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes*](/books/the-intellectual-life-of-the-british-working-classes) by Jonathan Rose, especially his point on the importance of being "intellectual" and reading the "classics" in the formation of the labour movement, something it feels like has been stripped from society today.

{% include quote.html 
  content="The founders of the Labour Party and other self-educated radicals realized that no disenfranchised people could be emancipated unless they created an autonomous intellectual life. Working people would have to develop their own ways of framing the world, their own political goals, their own strategies for achieving those goals."
  author='Jonathan Rose'
  title='The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes'
  link='/books/the-intellectual-life-of-the-british-working-classes'
%}

[*Orality and Literacy*](/books#Orality_and_Literacy) by Walter Ong was a good gateway to the idea of "secondary orality" that [Joe Weisenthal](https://x.com/TheStalwart/status/1887895667802046950) has been promoting for years. *Digital Future in the Rearview Mirror* by Andrey Mir and *No Sense of Place* by Joshua Meyrowitz are on the reading list for next year under that topic.

Unintentionally, I fell into a lot of history-of-Christianity-adjacent books and books about translation, all of which were interesting and each benefitting from the others' [context](/notes/context).

{% include quote.html 
  content="For translation, and for us all, meaning is context.
  ...
  Any piece of language behaviour, even a simple request for a coffee, acquires a different meaning when its context of utterance is changed."
  author="David Bellos"
  title="Is That A Fish in Your Ear?"
  link="/Books#Is_That_a_Fish_in_Your_Ear?"
%}

There were also obviously more great meta-themed books about reading and writing (e.g., [*The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes*](/books/the-intellectual-life-of-the-british-working-classes) and [*Essays One*](/books#Essays_One), respectively).

## Next Year
I'm happy with not actually keeping up with one book a week, and next year I want to spend a bit more time with some meatier books or groups of books. I actually want to be more targeted in the groups of books read together. Consecutive books' ideas and themes often get linked together, but as you can imagine there are more natural, aligned sets you could create with some level of intentionality. 

E.g. all of the Bible-related books I spread out across this year ([*The Word*](/books#The_Word), [*Is That a Fish in Your Ear*](/books#Is_That_a_Fish_in_Your_Ear?), [*The Ball and the Cross*](/books#The_Ball_and_the_Cross), [*Can We Trust the Gospels?*](/books#Can_We_Trust_the_Gospels?)) could have been read as a collection, with the ideas feeding into and between each other more than they did.

I also want to even out the gender balance a bit—I try pick books largely based on how interesting the contents seem, with limited consideration of the author's attributes beyond writing, but only ~10% female authors over almost 40 books is probably too low.

And I'd like to re-visit some of the books I read in 2020 and 2021, be a bit more intentional with [re-reading](/notes/re-reading), catch up on all of the missing blurbs, get on top of the notes pages for the more interesting non-fiction books I read this past year, and aim to read about a book a week.

All that being said, here's a tentative and incomplete 2026 reading list that I will in no way be beholden to:
- *Digital Future in the Rearview Mirror* - Andrey Mir
- *No Sense of Place* - Joshua Meyrowitz
- *The Geography of Thought* - Richard Nisbett
- *A Time of Gifts* - Patrick Leigh Fermor
- *Essays Two* - Lydia Davis
- *On the Calculation of Volume (Book II)* - Solvej Balle
- *2666* - Roberto Bolaño
- *The Last Samurai* - Helen DeWitt
- *The Children of the Sky* - Vernor Vinge
- *Bibliophobia* - Sarah Chihaya