---
layout: post
title: Eighteen months with the Ricoh GR IIIx
tags: [photography]
toc: true
---

I have never had an original thought. Especially not when it comes to photographic tools. 

So, obviously, I succumbed to the hype and the algorithmic black hole I'd been pulled into. I'd been keeping my eye out for deals, and when I saw a couple of listings on Facebook Marketplace I started sending a couple of messages.

Anyway out in western Sydney I ended up handing a wad of cash to a guy in a black truck, and he handed me back a brown paper bag with the goods inside[^1].

{% include picture.html
   file="ricoh4.webp"
   caption="At the Australian Open, 2025."
   class="wide"
%}

## A day in the life

While my phone camera is fine, it's nice to not be pulling my phone out to take photos. Really the point of a point-and-shoot like this is to have a separate machine that (a) only takes photos and is not connected to social media, (b) takes better photos than a telephone, but (c) is still portable and, ideally, pocketable. 

For the Ricoh, the size-to-quality ratio is pretty well unbeatable, and the camera itself is actually pocketable. I can carry it around all day without noticing it, but it's quick — ready to take photos in about two seconds from the press of the on button. The lens is great, not special[^2]. The images are sharp, almost as good as the Fuji[^3]. Really the only aspect that causes friction is the autofocus, which can be a touch sluggish, plus the little lag when tapping to select a new focus area. I guess I need to get into the snap focus mode more. 

I don't miss having an optical viewfinder, either. I'm not really a purist in that sense — as long as I can see what I'm taking photos of in some way, I'm fine. 

I picked the GR IIIx (40mm equivalent) over the III (28mm equivalent) because I prefer the focus (pardon the pun) of the tighter focal length — I almost always find that I want to crop a picture once it's taken, almost without fail. A tighter lens sort of preempts that habit, although it doesn't stop it entirely. 

{% include picture.html
   file="ricoh3.webp"
   caption="Couldn't have leant back much further without falling out of my chair. Mount Victoria."
%}

I actually bought a little attachable flash for it too, to use out at night. This (or any indoor photography) would be the place where the GR III and the wider lens would be the better choice — at 40mm it's a *little* tight trying to fit everything in, always backing up in my chair or up against a wall to get everything in. The perils of apartment living. 

But it still works well as a photography-only device, where I'm not pulling out a phone to take photos and then getting sucked into some other app. Plus it doesn't look too intimidating for "non-photographers"[^4] — they feel more empowered (usually, as long as they don't know the price tag) to pick it up and start shooting themselves if it's not being used. I have an "FF" (short for "Friends and Family") preset as one of the user modes on the dial for exactly that purpose: everything full auto, set and forget.

## Everyday carry
More and more I've just been keeping it in my bag, carrying it around to have on hand. I would never do this with a larger camera (read: one that feels more serious). And I still defer to pulling out my phone to capture a quick shot of a moment or of a memory because it still is always there. 

That's what I want to work on next, bringing the Ricoh out and about automatically, and re-training that tendency to pull out the phone for a photo.

Battery has never been an issue because I just have three batteries and have a charger that charges them all. The little case I have for the Ricoh can fit the two spare batteries too. They weigh like 25 grams each — no issue carrying them all around to get essentially all-day battery life. 

{% include picture.html
   file="ricoh2.webp"
   caption="Fire door, Maroochydore."
%}

## Cooking up something good

> **Image Control**: Standard
>
> **Saturation**: +1
>
> **High Key Adjustment**: +1
>
> **Contrast**: -1
>
> **Contrast (Highlight)**: -3
>
> **Contrast (Shadow)**: -2
>
> **Highlight Correction**: On
>
> **Shadow Correction**: Low
>
> **AE Metering**: Highlight-weighted 

I'm still working my way through a "recipe", meaning the settings used in-camera to make the digital photo look a bit more like film. I'll put the settings below. It's close, but photos still come out a little dark and a little red for my taste. You can see it in the indoor photo above, noting that it was the evening and indoors. I think I'll tweak the white balance and maybe the high key adjustment, and see what comes out.

{% include picture.html
   file="ricoh5.webp"
   caption="Chowder Bay Traffic, Mosman."
   class="wide"
%}

## Second-hand gear economics
It might feel like a fairly high price to pay *in addition to a phone*, which already takes adequate pictures, but I have thoughts about this too.

Generally, when it comes to buying second-hand camera gear (or anything else in this sort of category of a very slowly depreciating asset), I normally think about the cost as the difference between what I paid and what I can sell it for — not the actual price.

This might sound obvious. It might sound like cope. But if I spent $1,000 to buy this camera second-hand, and (looking on Facebook marketplace right now) I could sell it for $1,000, in my mind really I've rented this camera for free[^5] for 18 months. It lowers the pressure in haggling for a great deal in the first place. Obviously this only works if you can afford to tie up that amount of cash over the short- to medium-term.

{% include picture.html
   file="ricoh6.webp"
   caption="Circular Quay foot traffic."
%}

[^1]: This is not a joke or a metaphor — this is literally what happened. 
[^2]: I have a special place in my heart for the [Fuji 35mm](/photos/euro) [f/2 lens](/photos/japan), which is *special*. Every time I swap it out for my telephoto lens and I see the flatter rendering, it makes me sad.
[^3]: I did find that converting the JPEGs to WebP files for these posts reduces some of the detail contrast in the pictures, which is doing the lens a bit of a disservice too.
[^4]: What does the distinction between "photographer" and "non-photographer" even mean anymore? Everyone is carrying an adequate-to-good camera in their pocket, at all times. I guess it's still enough to distinguish between those who'd pick up the Ricoh, and those who won't.
[^5]: Boy math; really it's "free" less the price of whatever inflation and/or hypothetical return rate you want to apply to $1,000 for 18 months.