---
layout: post
title: Reading in 2025 - a review
tags: [reading]
toc: true
---

Every year I aim to read about a book a week. Normally (almost every year) I fall short, but the goal helps me keep to keep picking up books when I get into a lull. I try not to be too dogmatic about it, but if it's been a few weeks without getting through a single book I know it's time to re-prioritise.

## Overview
In 2025 I read 38 books, on the low end but still passable. Anything below about 30 and I'd start to worry. The full list of books is available at the [Books](/books) link at the top of the sidebar—this post is just a summary of the books, themes, patterns, key quotes, etc., from the past year only and some guiding notes for next year. 

I started adding short blurbs this year, a paragraph's worth of review per book. The original reason for list record of books is to remember what I've actually read[^1], and often I look back on entries in the lists and find a total blank in terms of my actual reading experience. So, writing short reviews of each book is a habit aimed mostly at augmenting my own memory and capture a bit of what I was thinking at the time. It hasn't totally stuck yet, but I already appreciate reading the ones I do have and I'm trying to fill in the gaps as I go (including adding older reviews retroactively).

{% include quote.html
  content='The great strength of these memoirs is that they represent an effort by working people to write their own history. All historians must use data selectively, but here, in the first instance, within some limits, the working classes decided what to include. Tellingly, they wrote at length about their reading, as if they were pointing the way for future historians.'
  author='Jonathan Rose'
  title='The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes'
  link='/books/the-intellectual-life-of-the-british-working-classes'
%}

In the distant, remote future the goal would be to have a system of reviews and quotations as effective as Mandy Brown's [*A Working Library*](https://aworkinglibrary.com/), but I'm a long way off.

Like every year, I also started but didn't finish a bunch of books: *Quicksilver* by Neal Stephenson (now re-kindled), *One Hundred Years of Solitude* (came back from holiday and got distracted), and *No Sense of Place* by Joshua Meyerowitz (too much work on at the same time). I'll probably come back to all of these at some point. 

For the rest—the ones I did finish—we'll split it up into fiction and non-fiction, starting with the former.

## Fiction
I can't believe I'd never read any Neal Stephenson books before. [*Anathem*](/books#Anathem) immediately vaulted into my pantheon of top books, and basically shut out the top spot for best book of the year in February. I got through [*The Diamond Age*](/books#The_Diamond_Age) and started *Quicksilver*, both of which are also great.

{% include quote.html
  content='Well, bad crap would be an unformatted document consisting of random letters. Good crap would be a beautifully typeset, well-written document that contained a hundred correct, verifiable sentences and one that was subtly false. It’s a lot harder to generate good crap. At first they had to hire humans to churn it out. They mostly did it by taking legitimate documents and inserting errors—swapping one name for another, say.'
  author='Neal Stephenson'
  title='Anathem'
  link='/books#Anathem'
%}

## Non-Fiction
Only 14 non-fiction books this year, when normally it's closer to 60-40 fiction to non-fiction. Again, the start of the year was  

{% include quote.html 
  content="For translation, and for us all, meaning is context.
  ...
  Any piece of language behaviour, even a simple request for a coffee, acquires a different meaning when its context of utterance is changed."
  author="David Bellos"
  title="Is That A Fish in Your Ear?"
  link="/Books#Is_That_a_Fish_in_Your_Ear?"
%}

## Next Year
I'm happy with not actually keeping up with one book a week, and next year I want to spend a bit more time with some meatier books or groups of books. I actually want to be more targeted in the groups of books read together. Consecutive books' ideas and themes often get linked together, but as you can imagine there are more natural, aligned sets you could create with some level of intentionality. 

E.g. all of the Bible-related books I spread out across this year ([*The Word*](/books#The_Word), [*Is That a Fish in Your Ear*](/books#Is_That_a_Fish_in_Your_Ear?), [*The Ball and the Cross*](/books#The_Ball_and_the_Cross), [*Can We Trust the Gospels?*](/books#Can_We_Trust_the_Gospels?)) could have been read as a collection, with the ideas feeding into and between each other more than they did.

I also want to even out the gender balance a bit—I try pick books largely based on how interesting the contents seem, with some consideration of the author, but only ~10% female authors over almost 40 books is surely too low.

And lastly I'd like to re-visit some of the books I read in 2020 and 2021, be a bit more intentional with [re-reading](/notes/re-reading), catch up on all of the missing blurbs, and get on top of the notes pages for the more interesting non-fiction books I read this past year.

{% include quote.html
  content='"Well, we won\'t quarrel about a word," said the other, pleasantly.
  "Why on earth not?" said MacIan, with a sudden asperity. "Why shouldn\'t we quarrel about a word? What is the good of words if they aren\'t important enough to quarrel over? Why do we choose one word more than another if there isn\'t any difference between them? If you called a woman a chimpanzee instead of an angel, wouldn\'t there be a quarrel about a word? If you\'re not going to argue about words, what are you going to argue about?'
  title='The Ball and the Cross'
  author='G.K. Chesterton'
%}

[^1]: As I'm putting this post together I'm having to refer to my list constantly because there's no way I'd be able to rattle off all 38 books from this year.